So for example, if you wanna read or
change attributes of a DOM element,
it's actually pretty simple.
We just use dot syntax.
So there is no need for special syntax,
like using an '@' symbol or using colon.
I mean, depends on different frameworks,
different ways to this, okay, but
it's just dot syntax.
We use JavaScript dot syntax
notation to change properties.
So, and by the way, I'm here simplifying
this a little bit because actually,
it's a little bit more complex.
We have properties and HTML attributes,
and actually not the same.
Later I will show you an example
when this is not exactly the same.
But for now,
this is the first part of the workshop.
Let's simplify this a little bit.
And let's say that when you change the
property of the JavaScript DOM element,
you are kind of changing the attribute,
the HTML attribute.
And 99% of the properties have the same
name as the HTML attribute name.
But there are a couple of exceptions.
For example, class.
Because class, the HTML class attribute,
is class name in JavaScript,
that's because class,
it's a reserved keyword in JavaScript.
So it can't be used as a property name.
The other one is for,
when you have a label in HTML, label for.
In JavaScript, it's not called for,
it's called htmlFor.
And if you're coming from React, you're
probably used to that because React or
other language,
because it's also JavaScript so
they're also changing those properties,
anyway.
To change the styles of a DOM element,
we access the style object
of the DOM element.
I'm talking about that object.
So every DOM element has a style property,
and
that style property have all
the CSS attributes on that
particular browser available
as a JavaScript property.
And in this case, have in mind,
we need to change the kebab syntax.
That's the one with a hyphen, for
example, font-size or border-right-color.
We change that to camel case, okay?
So capital R, capital C, capital S.
And again, most of the libraries that
you're used to are already doing that.
So that's probably not new, okay?
Because we cannot use a hyphen
in JavaScript in a property.
That's why they had to make that change.
And to listen for events,
we typically use addEventListener.
The name of the event as a string and
a function, okay?
So we take an element.
It can be a button.
It can be the whole document.
It can be the window,
a list, a ul, anything,
any object in the DOM structure
can have an event listener.
It's addEventListener, event name.
And then the handler, the function,
can be a function that you declare there,
like this.
It can be like a little function
that is typically pretty common.
And, of course,
these days you can use arrow functions
to declare the event handler.
And the event handler receives
an argument with event metadata.
We will use that later.
But if you're not going to use it,
you don't even need to define that
because this is JavaScript, and
you're not forced to define labels or
variable names for all the arguments.
Okay, so
you can just do something like this.
And this is how, typically, event
handlers look like in JavaScript, okay?
So, to access and edit the contents
of an HTML, so you have a paragraph.
In the text of the paragraph,
you can change the text
content property, the inner HTML property.
The difference is that the first
one does not support HTML.
So if you write HTML, you will
actually convert the less than and
greater than symbols into
a Unicode representation in HTML.
So you will actually see the HTML,
the user will see the HTML code.
InnerHTML will actually
let you define HTML,
you can define the whole web page in
an inner HTML property as a string, or
you can use the DOM APIs to create new
nodes and we will see all the versions.
We will play with all these
versions later, okay?
So for example, in this case,
I'm getting an element by its ID,
but using querySelector,
I know its ID because it's hash.
So this is a CSS way to get an ID,
and I can read the text content,
or I can change the text
content of that element.
Very simple, it's just a property.
With innerHTML, it's just the same.
The difference is that
we can write the HTML.
And most of the time these days, we use
the template strings of the backtick
in JavaScript that will let us
even write multi-line strings.
So I can write HTML, like so, like if
it's an HTML file directly in JavaScript.
This is not JSX, okay,
because this is within a string,
it's still a string, okay?
But anyway, it kind of looks like JSX,
the only problem is that
no one is going to validate
if what we have inside
the string is valid or not.
And with DOM API,
using the DOM API looks more verbose.
So for example, in this case,
we can create an H1 with
document.createElement H1.
This is creating a new element,
a new h1 element in memory only for now.
Then we change the text content
of that h1 in memory and
we append that as a child to the element,
in this case,
a header inside a section, okay?
When we use appendChild,
In that case, it appears in the DOM.
Not yet in the UI because we
are still executing code, okay?
So when this thread is released, here,
when there is no more code to execute.
In that case, the browser will say,
okay, let's see, we have a new h1.
Let's render that, okay?
And then we create another one,
in this case,
a paragraph with its own text and we
are adding that also to the same element.
So now we will end up with the same code
as this one, innerHTML, but differently.
In this case, we wrote the h1 and
the paragraph as a string and
this is going to be parsed by the browser
and it will create the nodes for me.
Here, we are writing a string and
then the browser will pass that and
it will create the DOM elements for me.
And here I'm creating
the elements manually.
Every technique has pros and cons, okay?
Later we will use both and
you will understand which one
is better for each situation.
I'm not saying you need to
always use this one or that one,
it's typically based on the case.